A natural disaster is commonly defined as the harmful impacts of the natural environment on the socio-economic system (Book Natural Disasater + Kelman et al., 2016). Climate and weather extremes are always the primary cause of a natural disaster. Except for the extremes from natural climate variations, such as El Niño or La Niña, the changing climate and physical environment could also lead to many weather and climate extremes. Ongoing climate change results in spatial and temporal changes in the hydrological cycle. For example, the rising temperature gradually reshapes the agriculture regime and the growing season globally. The hydrological cycle changes tend to affect the intensity and frequency of extreme weather and climate conditions, which can lead to increasing natural disasters. Based on the Intergovernmental Panel report (IPCC) on climate change's impacts on the natural environment, 20-year extreme temperature appears to become a 2-year extreme, and 20-year extreme precipitation is likely to change to a 5-year extreme event in the 21st century. Besides, due the expected increasing frequecy and intensity and the changing spatial and temporal patterns of the precipitation and temperature, the floods and droughts, which are two common natural disasters, would probably intensify and be frequent in some catchments or climate regions. Therefore, in the foreseeable future, addressing climate and weather extremes and related natural disasters will be one of the most urgent tasks for human society.

Based on a study by the National Institute of Building Sciences (NIBS) in 2016, for every 1 dollar in the natural hazard mitigation grants funded by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), U.S. Economic Developement Administration (EDA), and U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Dvelopment (HUD), it can save 6 dollar in future disaster costs (citation - report), which  revealed a signiciant contribution of mitigation in disaster management. Although mitigation cannot reduce all impacts from a natural hazard, it can at least help avoid some major damages on scoiety, economy, physical environment, etc. Figure 1 shows a typical natural disaster risk management cycle (citation, book).  In the risk management cycle, preparedeness and mitigation are two critial components that help the society proactive to a natural disaster in future and reduece its the negative impacts. For many natural disasters, the development of a mutual monitoring and early warning system could directly improve the response time and help policymakers review and refine related mitigation plans and strategies. Hattegatted pointed out that the hydro-meteorological early warning system in world could rough reduce at least 0.3 billion (USD) damages from natural disasters. 

Entering in the 21st century, the rapid development of the Internet and social media makes it become progressively important to provide instant and valuable information in a natural disaster event. The number of environmental studies that used social media as their data sources increases since 2011 (Ghermandi and Sinclair 2019).  Also, the advantages of the information from social media are gradually appealing. For example, a study in Japan found that an earthquake warning system based on Twitter could detect earthquakes earlier than the Japanese Meteorological Agency. However, because of the size of social media's data and its real-time characteristic, it has to be automatically processed when we apply it to monitor natural disasters. And the very first task is to correctly classify whether the collected data include any inforamtion about natural disasters. Hence, in the final project of this course, our group proposes two ideas of utilizing the techniques from natural langauge processing (NLP) in deep learing (DL) to conduct the text classfication based on the data from tweets and online media reports for monitoring general natural disasters and droughts.

———————————————————————————————————————

 Project Idea 2: 

The second project idea is similar to the first one. We plan to build a NLP-based model to classify the types of drought impacts based on the descriptive texts that were collected from the news media and social media on the Drought Impact Reporter (DIR).

Background

Drought is one of the most costly natural disasters globally because of its broad impacts. Ongoing climate change is inclined to increase the frequency and intensity of drought by raising extreme variabilities over space and time in the hydrological cycle. However, compared to other natural disasters, such as floods and wildfire, drought impacts often lack structural and visible existence. Thus, drought impacts on different socio-economic aspects could be either tangible or intangible, direct or indirect. For example, some drought impacts on agriculture, such as crop failure, could be easily counted. However, some other impacts on agriculture, such as groundwater abstraction and its impacts on local watersheds and ecosystems, are much harder to estimate. Additionally, based on the propagation of a drought event, its impacts could last for weeks to even years. When a long-term drought event is ongoing, the drought could negatively impact many other social sectors, such as energy, tourism, and recreation, which won't be significantly affected by a short-term and rapid drought. The human-modified changes in climate and geographical environment make the drought-related impacts even more complicated. Identifying various drought impacts based on hydro-meteorological indicators would be more challenging.

Starting from 2005, the National Drought Mitigation Center (NDMC) developed a drought-information online database - Drought Impact Reporter (DIR) to fill the existing drought indices gap. Ones can access the DIR on the NDMC's website (https://droughtreporter.unl.edu/map/). DIR collects data from multiple resources that include but are not limited to media, users' observation reports, national weather station, Collaborative Community Rain Hail and Snow Network (CoCoRaHS). And online media takes a significant proportion of the data. The impact data are then classified into nine categories: agriculture, business & industry, energy, fire, plants & wildlife, relief, response & restrictions, society & public health, tourism & recreation, and water supply & quality. However, this procedure has been manually done by drought experts in the NDMC, which would be inevitably affected by the subjective experience. Therefore, with the application of NLP, we expect to automate the procedure and classify the text-based information into various types of drought impacts.

Data and Approaches

The original data set of drought impacts based on the media were filtered and downloaded from the DIR. After cleaning up and re-organizing,  the data is shown in Figure. Except for the identification code, the feature of Decription is the text-based drought impacts collected from media, and the column of Categories is the types of impacts. Because of the complexity of drought impacts, the corresponding types might not be unique. Therefore, compared to the first project idea, although the second one will also employ a NLP-based model, it is a multi-label classification, which means a same target can be assigned with more than one label. The literature review of the TC has been discussed above. In this project idea, according to the multi-label classification, we plan to try some classical neural networks in the NLP, such as a convolution neural network (CNN) with a word embedding. In the end, we expect to have a moderate perfermance on classfying the various drought impacts based on the media data.